NOTES ON SCORING MIKE BLUM'S  AND CHRIS JIGGINS' FG DATA
27 April 2004
Jim Mallet

BLUM DATA

1) I found a few species misidentifications, with reasons given in the
Excel file attached (modified from Blum).  These include several
H. demeter bouqueti (both males, identified previously as "burreyi?",
and females, which were identified as erato erato.

2) Most of the variation seems to be at two genes, which by presumed
homology with the Peru favorinus x etylus crosses consist of DRy/d and
Sd/sd, the latter being the "shape" supergene with St (split band, as
in E Ecuador, being another allele).  I think these genes are pretty solid.

3) There is a peculiar effect segregating in the dennis/ray/yellow fw
band phenotypes, which is an almost complete absence of distal yellow
fw spots, creating a big V out of the remaining proximal, anterior and
posterior spots of the forewing band.  This also seems to show up to
some extent in otherwise sd/sd individuals (pure postman-type shape), so
it may be unlinked to Sd.  Alternatively, variants of Sd produce similar
variants on either side of the hybrid zone.  Since it seems more prevalent
among yellow-banded individuals, I suggest it is merely a variant of the
amazonian pattern.  It looks very mimetic of some forms of Eueides (e.g.
tales).  I have not scored it.  See e.g. 90, 115, 116, 118, 126, 139,
166-168 on yellow fw bands, and 27, 113, 114, 161, 210 on red fw bands.

4) There are some nice strong yellow fw up basal spots on some individuals.
(i.e. on the anal part of the joint between fw and body, and also affects
yellow markings on the thorax, head etc.)
In SE Brazil, "yellow line" (and this is the base of that line) is supposed
to be linked to Sd, but here it seems to segregate independently.  There is
an exciting possibility that this basal spot might be linked to Cr, which
affects the presence of yellow hindwing bar, but which of course does
not segregate here.  I have some weak evidence from Peru that this is the case
but in Peru the spot was not strongly expressed, and also didn't segregate
in many broods.  And anyway the yellow spot phenotype is variable in
most races I have looked at.

5) The trickiest thing, when scoring this stuff, is to sort out epistasis
from linkage disequilibrium with respect to forewing band shape (the DRy/d
scoring is pretty much incontrovertable; you never get yellow forewing bands
without ray in this area).

My conclusions, based on the phenotypes, and their ratios in the populations
as well as on the Peruvian broods are as follows.

                Phenotype on different forewing band colours:
Shape
Genotype        Red                         Yellow

Sd/Sd           narrow ring of spots        Narrow ring of rather widely separated
                but spots broader and       spots, spots narrower than same Sd
                more coalesced than same    genotype on yellow spots.  Due to
                Sd genotype w/yellow spots. extreme dominance of Sd on yellow backgr
                e.g. 069, 084               some apparent yellow 'homozygotes' may
                                            actually be heterozygotes, e.g. 100

Sd/sd           Usually broken up spots     Very similar to above, but with varying
                on underside, with varying  amounts of blurring and intermediacy,
                degrees of intermediacy     especially on upperside and in males.
                and blurred edges,          Much less blurred expression in the
                especially on upperside     centre of the ring of spots
                e.g. 76, 114, 142, 200      than in red forewing phenotypes
                                            e.g. 115, 205, 202.  Probably many of
                                            these genotypes are lurking within the
                                            apparent "Sd/Sd" homozygote yellow fw
                                            band phenotypes.


                Thus the "sd" (broad postman band shape) allele is more recessive:
                                a) on the underside than the upperside
                                b) on females than on males
                                c) on yellow than on red forewing colours
                All of these features are also found in Peruvian Amazonian x postman
                crosses!

sd/sd           Broad, "postman"            Broad expression, but apparently fuzzy
                band expression, with few   and with very thick black lines along
                or weak invaginations or    veins, and over less extensive area than
                along veins                 red forewing band extent.
                                            I found only two: 118 and 197.
                                            (10 May: ind. 202 as well!)


                The differences in Sd expression are well seen in individuals
                jointly expressing yellow and red as DRy/d heterozygotes: These
                individuals always have stronger red expression on the outer part of
                the bands, and near the veins than in the centre of the zone sof
                expression, where the the yellow 'overprinting' is mostly found.

Because have alleles have variable expression or dosage even in pure races, and
because heterozygosity halves dosage, it would not be surprising if some of the
scores of the heterozygotes overlapped some of the homozygotes in some of these
comparisons.  Thus there are  almost certainly a few "incorrect" scorings here,
but I have kept these to a minimum.  Realizing this, I tried to lump heterozygotes to
the most dominant phenotype in my analyses of Peruvian Cr and Sd genotypes, which
I believe minimizes the risk of mis-scoring.  We should try the analyses in Guiana
both ways, thus lumping Sd/Sd and Sd/sd as Sd/-, and also separating them.



FRENCH GUIANA ERATO COLOUR PATTERN GENETICS (contd.)

10 May 2004

I have now completed scoring Chris's French Guiana specimens.

The scoring was as per last time.  However, this time,
there were a significant number of problem individuals when scoring Sd
genotypes.  These are usually males with red forewing bands, which on
the underside show pretty typical Sd/Sd patterns, but where the red
on the uppersides show some evidence of "spreading" out from the narrow
band of spots of the Amazonian colour pattern.  The females, interestingly,
show little evidence of such difficulties.  I think I am right as
interpreting these as Sd/Sd (i.e. pure Amazonian) forewing band shape.
As before, the broken spot shape is more dominant in females
and in yellow-banded (i.e. DRy/DRy homozygote) individuals.

In a few cases, there are red-banded
individuals which might be sd/sd, but could also possibly be Sd/sd.  As
usual, variable penetrance is a problem at this locus.  But apart from the
two(I think) cases of sd/sd - Sd/sd confusion, the rest can be treated as
dominant phenotype.

I haven't actually checked, but I guess that
there is dearth of Sd heterozygotes, because some of the apparent
DRy/DRy Sd/Sd individuals are really DRy/DRy Sd/sd.

By lumping the Sd/Sd and Sd/sd phenotypes as all Sd/- dominant
phenotypes, one should be able to get around most of the scoring
difficulties, therefore.  This was the policy I adopted in
Mallet et al. 1990 (Genetics) and Mallet 1989 (Proc Roy Soc)
analyses.

The reason why I do not believe in the upperside responder gene
(Ur/ur) of Sheppard et al. 1985, with respect to forewing band
shape, is because of my results from known genotypes of Sd
as evidenced by the broods in Mallet 1989 (see Proc Roy Soc
236 p. 174), and the very clear effects of Sd on both forewing
band shape and on hindwing bar expression (not found in FG).
It seems to me that variable expression at the
same gene (numbers of transcription factor binding sites?)
may well be to blame for the variability within and between
broods; most of this can be explained by the Sd element itself.

I have also noted whether the forewing band in DRy/d heterozygotes is red only,
red/yellow, red/white, or red with faint traces of yellow (R, R/Y, R/W, R(/Y),
respectively).  As you will see, there is a correlation between yellow fw band
expression in DRy/d heterozygotes and the presence of strong basal forewing
spots (i.e. ++).  As before, the ++ would be evidence of Cr/Cr genotype, which
seems to enhance yellow expression.

In one case, Blum's no. 202, there is partial yellow/black expression in
a DRy/DRy homozygote, which is, I now think, sd/sd for shape.  This may be
because the Cr genotype is cr/cr or Cr/cr (evidenced by weak (+) expression
of yellow basal forewing spots.  The anomaly in this paragraph, and the
R/Y scale mixing mentioned in the last paragraph could be due to Chris &
Owen's hypothesis that the Cr allele from Amazonia enhances yellow production,
making the genetics of Cr similar to that in the himera/erato cyrbia crosses.
Unfortunately, in this case, we only have the variable and somewhat unreliable
clue for Cr/Cr genotypes afforded by strong yellow basal spot expression.

See:

http://www.ucl.ac.uk/taxome/hyb/FGBlum/FG.Blum.Data.processed.xls